[Amit Varma]: There is only one thing political parties care about in a democracy, winning elections.
[Amit Varma]: This includes political parties out of power and those in power.
[Amit Varma]: You might assume that once a party wins elections and forms a government, its main focus is
[Amit Varma]: to govern responsibly.
[Amit Varma]: Well, LOL.
[Amit Varma]: In fact, ROTFLOL.
[Amit Varma]: All they care about is winning the next elections and there is very little correlation between
[Amit Varma]: governing well and getting votes.
[Amit Varma]: That's the nature of the beast.
[Unknown]: Welcome to The Seen and the Unseen, our weekly podcast on economics, politics and behavioral
[Unknown]: science.
[Unknown]: Please welcome your host, Amit Badma.
[Amit Varma]: Welcome to The Seen and the Unseen.
[Amit Varma]: A few weeks ago, in the magazine I edit, Pragati, at ThinkPragati.com, I reviewed an excellent
[Amit Varma]: book called How the BJP Wins by Prashant Jha.
[Amit Varma]: The book contained some amazing insights into the BJP election machine that is run so well
[Amit Varma]: by Amit Shah.
[Amit Varma]: Now, no matter what you think of the BJP or Narendra Modi, and my opposition to the man
[Amit Varma]: in the party is well known, everyone agrees that the election machine is just stupendous.
[Amit Varma]: In fact, reading the book brought me round to the view that given the complexity of the
[Amit Varma]: Indian political marketplace, Amit Shah might even be the greatest political strategist
[Amit Varma]: in history.
[Amit Varma]: So my guest today on the show is the author of that fine book, Prashant Jha.
[Amit Varma]: Prashant works at the Hindustan Times and I caught up with him a few weeks ago at the
[Amit Varma]: sidelines of the Bangalore Literature Festival.
[Amit Varma]: Here's a conversation we had.
[Amit Varma]: Prashant, welcome to The Seen and the Unseen.
[Amit Varma]: Thank you, Amit, for having me.
[Amit Varma]: Prashant, your book How the BJP Wins was a great eye-opener for me because I had been
[Amit Varma]: led to some much simpler notions of why the BJP did what they did.
[Amit Varma]: One partly assumed that, hey, people were sick of the previous UPA government and so
[Amit Varma]: on.
[Amit Varma]: There was a development narrative.
[Amit Varma]: There was a RSS polarization narrative and there were these simple narratives and one
[Amit Varma]: assumed that everything just came together and I'd written in the past that Modi was
[Amit Varma]: like a Rorschach inkblot, test people could see in him what they wanted.
[Amit Varma]: But actually what I learned from your book was that the kind of strategic thinking, the
[Amit Varma]: kind of organization that went into prepping the BJP for power, especially in the heartland
[Amit Varma]: states, especially in UP, which is a big focus of your book, is just nothing short of staggering
[Unknown]: it ought to be sort of a case study.
[Unknown]: So when we start, what are the sort of separate elements you break this down into?
[Guest]: What did they start off by thinking about when they started planning the 2014 campaign?
[Guest]: So take on from the 2014 campaign and look at how BJP has also become dominant post-2014
[Guest]: because many of the elections that we see, many of the governments that the BJP has formed
[Guest]: has happened post its victory in 2014.
[Guest]: I think it's something useful to always think about when we're thinking about elections
[Guest]: that it's always easier to understand elections in retrospect and when election campaigning
[Guest]: is on, when these strategies are being formulated, it's more difficult to grasp it.
[Guest]: So looking back, what we can see now is that the one dominant strand in the BJP strategy
[Guest]: was projection of Prime Minister Narendra Modi's image and image is quite central to
[Guest]: it.
[Guest]: I spoke to Govind Acharya, one of the older Sangh ideologues who used to play an important
[Guest]: role in the BJP, and he said to me, for Narendra Modi, politics is equal to power, power stems
[Guest]: from elections, elections are about images and so politics is equal to images signalling
[Guest]: and messaging.
[Guest]: And if you use that framework to understand Modi, what you see is that between 2002 and
[Guest]: 2007, Modi was a Hindu Hriday Samrat based on what had happened in Gujarat.
[Guest]: From 2007, there was a conscious imagery invention of becoming a Vikas Purush delivering a Gujarat
[Guest]: model of development, while retaining elements of the strong Hindu Hriday image.
[Guest]: But over the past two, two and a half years, it is these twin images that had come in the
[Guest]: 2014 election.
[Guest]: But in the past two and a half years, particularly after 2015, which is a very critical year
[Guest]: in BJP's evolution as I see it, there has been a third underappreciated shift in Modi's
[Guest]: image to becoming a Garibon Ka Neta.
[Guest]: Why did he feel the need for it?
[Guest]: He felt the need for it after the Delhi defeat.
[Guest]: He felt the need for it after the Bihari humiliation.
[Guest]: He felt the need for it when he had to backtrack on amending the Land Acquisition Act.
[Guest]: He felt the need for it when he started being mocked for his foreign travels.
[Guest]: He felt the need for it after Rahul Gandhi made what clearly has been the sharpest political
[Guest]: intervention yet of a suit boot ki sarkar.
[Guest]: And BJP felt that its problem, its handicap throughout was that it was seen as a party
[Guest]: of urban India, as a party of a sliced middle class, as a party which was soft towards the
[Guest]: elites.
[Guest]: And Modi decided that that's not the image trap that he wanted to remain with.
[Guest]: And so we see this reinvention happening, and that reinvention took two forms.
[Guest]: The first was a narrative around demonetization.
[Guest]: You have written, Amit, about demonetization, and we now clearly know that the economics
[Guest]: of demonetization was all flawed.
[Guest]: But look at the political narrative that he spun around it.
[Guest]: And I was traveling in UP right after demonetization, speaking to some of India's poorest citizens
[Guest]: in one of India's poorest corners, Purvanchal, and there was enormous support for it.
[Guest]: And if you go back to Modi's speeches, particularly one in Muradabad, which struck me, not only
[Guest]: was he saying that this is a battle that I am waging for the honest poor against the
[Unknown]: corrupt rich, he was mocking the rich, right, he was contemptuous of the rich.
[Guest]: So there was a very strong anti-rich narrative, which was tapping into this latent class resentment
[Guest]: that does exist in society, maybe because of the inequities that existed in society.
[Guest]: So there was this narrative around demonetization.
[Guest]: The second was sharper welfare delivery, and to give UPA its share of credit, they did
[Guest]: realize towards the end that India's welfare architecture is leaky.
[Guest]: And so they commissioned a socioeconomic caste survey, they started thinking about direct
[Guest]: benefits transfer, they started thinking about Aadhaar, and while all these moves are controversial
[Guest]: in their own regard, what this did was this gave an infrastructure, this gave foundations
[Guest]: to the BJP to run with, to improve the welfare architecture to some extent.
[Guest]: It's still leaky, there is some improvement, and with it, it delivers cylinders for instance
[Guest]: to the UPA electorate.
[Guest]: And so I think it is Modi's image reinvention, and has allowed BJP to construct a multi-class
[Unknown]: alliance.
[Amit Varma]: And this multi-class alliance is the first source of strength for the party.
[Amit Varma]: And you know, one of the reasons why over the years as a commentator and a blogger and
[Unknown]: so on, if distrusted political analysis is like you correctly pointed out, a lot of it
[Unknown]: is hindsight bias.
[Unknown]: You're looking back and you're force fitting narratives, but that's clearly not what you've
[Unknown]: done.
[Amit Varma]: Because even a couple of years ago, a good friend of mine who knows Modi very well, told
[Unknown]: me that Modi's next big focus is going to be on class warfare, and it's turned out exactly
[Unknown]: like that.
[Unknown]: And right down to, you know, I love the analysis that you made of a speech of his, where the
[Amit Varma]: way he's using language with all those trigger words and those keywords and, you know, is
[Amit Varma]: absolutely phenomenal, and the amount of planning that actually went in, it wasn't that accidentally
[Unknown]: it happened to be convenient, so he reinvented himself as a gareebo ka neta.
[Amit Varma]: That was actually how he planned to do it.
[Amit Varma]: My other question to you regarding the narrative, therefore, is that, you know, going all the
[Amit Varma]: way from Hindu Hriday Samrat to Vikas Purush to gareebo ka neta, these are very different
[Amit Varma]: things.
[Amit Varma]: How did he manage them all?
[Guest]: What is the magic?
[Guest]: I don't know whether I have a neat answer to that question, because it is a good question,
[Guest]: and it does speak of his political genius.
[Guest]: And there is little doubt that to be able to straddle these different worlds, these
[Guest]: different narratives, speak to different audiences with different messages, while still not diluting
[Guest]: one of those three images requires a lot, so the guy can still go to Kedarnath and speak
[Guest]: about Hindu regeneration and give that implicit message and come out as a proud cultural Hindu.
[Guest]: He can still go to an industry chamber and tell them that, look, GST is for your good
[Guest]: eventually and he can do bank recapitalization, which I think is a move as a signal to his
[Guest]: original constituents, look, I have not forgotten you, and he can still do welfare politics.
[Guest]: And I think in 2019, for instance, the key elements of this welfare politics will be
[Guest]: Jan Dhan, construction of toilets, the Ujjwara scheme again, and power.
[Guest]: And if he is able to deliver even a fraction of what he has promised on power to all households.
[Guest]: So this requires a very careful balancing act, and Modi till now has succeeded.
[Guest]: But it is precisely because of the coalition that he has built, sometimes constructing
[Guest]: a coalition is easier than sustaining it, especially when you are in power and you need
[Guest]: to be delivering to all these three different constituencies.
[Guest]: And that's, I think, his biggest challenge.
[Guest]: In this shift to the pro-poor image, and not that he has yet done a lot in terms of tangibles
[Guest]: for the poor, but in the shift to the pro-poor image, is he losing out on his original constituents?
[Guest]: And some of the disillusionment that we see over the past few months, articulated on social
[Guest]: media is coming from his original constituents.
[Guest]: So will he be able to keep it together?
[Guest]: And that, I don't know whether we are in waiting for a fourth image reinvention and what that
[Guest]: will be.
[Guest]: I've even seen disaffection on Twitter about how he's not Hindu enough, which is, you know,
[Amit Varma]: like you said, the original.
[Amit Varma]: And the interesting thing about all this is that 30 years ago, it would have been possible
[Unknown]: to be different things to different people.
[Unknown]: Because if you speak at Kedarnath and you speak to an industry chamber, your speech
[Unknown]: is restricted to those audiences.
[Amit Varma]: But today everything is on YouTube, everything is widely reported.
[Amit Varma]: And I think one factor in that just sinking aloud might well be that people believe what
[Amit Varma]: they want to believe.
[Amit Varma]: So those who see him as a Hindu, Hriday Samrat, they won't bother about the other stuff.
[Amit Varma]: And maybe something else, just to take forward that thought is that I was in Bihar six weeks
[Guest]: ago and I was, I traveled through six districts asking voters what they thought about Modi.
[Guest]: And they said, he's doing good work, he's cleaning up dirt.
[Guest]: And I asked them, tell me one tangible thing that has changed in your life.
[Guest]: And many of them did not have an answer.
[Guest]: But there was this enormous faith in the intent and integrity of the man.
[Guest]: And I think this faith in the intent and integrity of the man has allowed him to straddle these
[Guest]: different worlds.
[Guest]: And that faith in the intent and integrity comes from this perception that he's not in
[Guest]: this for himself.
[Guest]: He doesn't have a family.
[Guest]: He's not making money.
[Guest]: He is committed to the state, to the nation.
[Guest]: So I mean, all that, that is the overarching image under which he can do these, you know,
[Amit Varma]: this balancing act.
[Amit Varma]: It's masterful image building.
[Amit Varma]: And, you know, that brings me to the next point.
[Amit Varma]: And then the next thing that you address in the book is that, again, there's a simplistic
[Amit Varma]: vision that the election was all about Modi.
[Amit Varma]: But actually, despite the remarkable work that he did constructing these narratives
[Amit Varma]: and redefining himself, it wasn't all about Modi.
[Amit Varma]: The BJP ground game was absolutely mind blowing.
[Amit Varma]: And the detail in which you've described it in the book just sort of blew me away.
[Amit Varma]: Can you tell me a little bit more about the kind of conscious thought that they put into
[Amit Varma]: redefining the ground game?
[Amit Varma]: So I really believe that Amit Shah has created the most formidable national election machinery
[Guest]: this country has seen.
[Guest]: Congress has been in power for longer, of course, but Congress was a mass-based party.
[Guest]: It didn't rely as much on the cadre.
[Guest]: We have seen regional variance with strong organizations.
[Guest]: The left in West Bengal had a strong organization, Travadian parties in Tamil Nadu have had strong
[Guest]: organizations, but there is no national party with the kind of sangathan that BJP has today.
[Unknown]: And what, and this, this is clearly the Amit Shah school of election management, I think.
[Guest]: If one was to identify key elements in it, the first, when he took over as president,
[Guest]: was focusing on numbers and the quantitative expansion of the membership base.
[Guest]: Many of us mocked him, thought that this missed call membership drive means very little, that
[Guest]: these figures are going to be all conjured up.
[Guest]: Today, they claim they're the world's largest party, larger than the Chinese Communist Party.
[Unknown]: Even if that is an exaggeration, and we don't have any way of independently verifying the
[Guest]: figures that they put up of over 10 crore members, even if there are a few crore short,
[Guest]: there is no doubt that there's been a massive expansion of the BJP membership base.
[Guest]: And when I went back and looked at how they did it, the first thing they did in a state
[Guest]: like UP, which has 1,41,000 booths in 2014, they realized that in 13,000 booths, they
[Unknown]: got no votes.
[Unknown]: And they said, these are Muslim booths, we won't worry about them.
[Guest]: The other booths, they told these booth committees that, look, we want you to enroll 100 members
[Guest]: each in your booths.
[Guest]: Now, usually what happens in political parties is that between elections, booth committees
[Guest]: are dormant.
[Guest]: Now here, the booth committees have just worked and delivered your 2014 mandate, and the party
[Guest]: headquarter was telling the party booth committee, no, go back and get us 100 members each.
[Guest]: Then they told the new members, get us more members.
[Guest]: They recognize that a state like UP or even Bihar has high degrees of intrastate migration.
[Guest]: We think about these states contributing migrant labor to Bombay, to Delhi, but there's high
[Guest]: levels of intrastate migration because women marry and move to other villages.
[Guest]: So they set up block level camps so that women or even men who migrated for work would get
[Guest]: an opportunity to enroll themselves as members.
[Guest]: So there is this quantitative expansion.
[Guest]: The second was that in this process, what they were also doing was qualitatively changing
[Guest]: the nature of the relationship between the party high command and the party grassroots.
[Guest]: The party grassroots now was constantly mobile, this was constantly in operation.
[Guest]: So after the membership campaign, they told the booth committees that now you go back
[Guest]: and get these new members to fill up forms.
[Guest]: This will be a part of something we call Mahasampar Kabhiyaan.
[Guest]: It was not as successful as the membership campaign because getting somebody to give
[Guest]: a missed call is easier than getting somebody to fill long, tedious forms.
[Guest]: But so they didn't succeed on the same scale.
[Guest]: But what was happening was that the booth committee was active.
[Guest]: Then they worked on organizational elections and training camps where they were again,
[Guest]: just ensuring that the machinery was being well oiled.
[Guest]: Look at ticket distribution, which comes up closer to the election.
[Guest]: The BJP has had this debate internally in the organization about seats where they don't
[Guest]: win.
[Guest]: There is a view within the Sangh that look, ideological purity is important.
[Guest]: People have to rise up.
[Guest]: For Amit Shah, the only thing that matters is winnability.
[Guest]: So there were 60 to 80 seats in UP where they were not winning.
[Guest]: What did they do?
[Guest]: They picked up the 60 to 80 candidates who used to win those seats, imported them from
[Guest]: other parties, gave them tickets and felt that they will have to work within that ideological
[Guest]: framework.
[Guest]: Don't worry about it.
[Guest]: One of the things that Amit Shah often tells people back in Gujarat is that, why is it
[Guest]: that we have always run short of 5 to 10% votes despite working so hard?
[Unknown]: We have to compensate for the 5 to 10% vote.
[Guest]: And if we can't win, get the guy who can win, right?
[Guest]: Then you'll see a fifth element of this school of election management is begin early and
[Guest]: unleash a propaganda blitzkrieg.
[Guest]: In UP in November, they were doing parivartan yatras and they're going to start doing that
[Guest]: in the new election bound states.
[Guest]: I asked the BJP strategist, why are you doing it right now?
[Guest]: It's four months before the elections, don't you think you will peak early?
[Guest]: He said, in Hindi to me, bhajapa chha jaana chahiye, basically BJP should dominate the
[Guest]: public landscape.
[Guest]: In every district, we want either a yatra going through, or we want an OBC meeting,
[Guest]: or we want a woman-centric meeting, or we want a youth-centric meeting.
[Unknown]: I said, why?
[Guest]: He said, I want the people in the district headquarter, people in the village square
[Guest]: forming opinion to think about us, even if they're not going to vote for us, to talk
[Guest]: about us.
[Guest]: I said, why?
[Guest]: He said, because half the battle in an Indian election is projecting the inevitability of
[Guest]: victory.
[Guest]: The Indian voter often thinks about the wasted vote, and I don't want to waste my vote and
[Guest]: vote for a party which will lose.
[Guest]: So how is my vote not wasted?
[Guest]: I vote for the party which is going to win.
[Guest]: So you have to project this image that you are going to win, right?
[Unknown]: And so that also requires a lot of careful organizational work.
[Guest]: And then it boils down to, closer to the elections, constituency, something called chunaf sanchalak
[Guest]: samithi, so election management committees in every constituency, which has a team.
[Guest]: So in what happens in many of the regional parties, for instance, or even in Congress,
[Guest]: the candidate is given the ticket and the candidate has to fight the election alone.
[Guest]: Here the candidate has to fight the election, has to put in resources, but the organization
[Guest]: plays an important role in supporting the candidate.
[Guest]: So the election management committee has a person who is managing the candidate schedule,
[Guest]: has a person who is coordinating with the party central command and getting leaders
[Guest]: for campaigning, has a person who is managing the money.
[Guest]: So there is that organizational backup.
[Guest]: All of this, I think, reflects a party machinery that is constantly at work, very well oiled
[Guest]: and all this, of course, also requires money.
[Guest]: And then that's also a very important, I think, element of how the BJP has been succeeding.
[Guest]: And then there is resource mobilization that is happening at the constituency level.
[Guest]: The candidate is supposed to have money on his own.
[Guest]: He's supposed to be the petrol pump owner who will fill in fuel for carters in the run-up
[Guest]: to elections.
[Guest]: He's supposed to be the transporter who will give a thousand or a hundred cars for rallies.
[Guest]: At the state level, there is resource mobilization where real estate entrepreneurs, mining barons,
[Guest]: people who depend on patronage at the state level would end up contributing to the party
[Unknown]: because they think the party will win.
[Unknown]: But what is distinct about BJP's resource mobilization is that there is centralization
[Unknown]: of resource mobilization.
[Guest]: Congress has this leaky, decentralized model of corruption where if Congress president
[Guest]: wants a certain amount, she would ask an aide, the aide would ask two chief ministers, the
[Guest]: two chief ministers would ask two ministers for 50 crores which needs to be mobilized.
[Guest]: Everybody in the Congress chain would earn 400 crores.
[Guest]: In BJP, you have a more centralized model depending on a more limited set of lenders.
[Guest]: And so that financial muscle then allows BJP to sustain the kind of rigorous organizational
[Unknown]: machine that we see in operation.
[Amit Varma]: Just earlier you mentioned that all Amit Shah cares about is winnability and I don't know
[Amit Varma]: if that should be a disappointment to the BJP supporters or something that might give
[Amit Varma]: hope to those who oppose them.
[Amit Varma]: But the point of the matter which I often keep making is that forget what a party stands
[Unknown]: for.
[Unknown]: All a party stands for is winning.
[Unknown]: They will do whatever it takes to win no matter what kind of transaction or politics.
[Unknown]: This involves, just to indicate how hard these guys worked, I want to read out a sentence
[Unknown]: from your book where you say that between August 2014 and March 2017, Shah traveled
[Unknown]: to almost every Indian state twice, covering over 5 lakh kilometers to understand, supervise
[Unknown]: and direct party units, unquote.
[Unknown]: And this to me is remarkable and it also explains Amit Shah's well-known disdain for elite commentators
[Unknown]: who are, you know, sitting in the ivory chambers and commenting because he actually did the
[Amit Varma]: hard yards and put in the hard work and so on.
[Amit Varma]: I don't want to move on to the next...
[Guest]: Since I wrote this, if I can just supplement it, since I wrote that, after March 2017,
[Guest]: he has done a 120 day yatra and he is on the road for four months after the UP success
[Guest]: when somebody else would have probably sat, got complacent and thought 2019 was a done
[Guest]: deal and we don't have to work.
[Guest]: So that element of hard work, you know, these guys just work hard and that's an underrated
[Guest]: quality that you don't think about.
[Amit Varma]: And when a talker works so hard, it percolates all the way down.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah.
[Amit Varma]: In fact, you know, talking of micromanagement, there's another anecdote in your book, I think
[Amit Varma]: in Maharashtra, you know, they were tracking by GPS, all the district unit heads to see
[Amit Varma]: exactly how many miles they do in a day, which is...
[Guest]: And whether they were just sitting in the district headquarters and making money off
[Amit Varma]: the fuel or whether they were actually...
[Amit Varma]: So that kind of brings me to the next point.
[Amit Varma]: It's one thing to rebuild Modi's image and make him, you know, all of these things.
[Unknown]: It's another thing to build a great ground game, but UP is still dreadfully complicated.
[Unknown]: Identity politics was ruled, there is this minefield of so many different castes and
[Unknown]: sub-castes and so on.
[Amit Varma]: And it was always thought that the BJP with a sort of pan-Hindu identity simply won't
[Amit Varma]: work.
[Amit Varma]: How did they crack the caste board?
[Guest]: So I think, you know, BJP today is becoming an inclusive Hindu party.
[Guest]: It remains a Hindu party, but it is an inclusive Hindu party that is moving beyond its largely
[Guest]: upper caste base.
[Guest]: And there are three or four, I think, tangible points that we can allude to, to substantiate
[Guest]: this.
[Guest]: The first is, of course, the prime minister's own image.
[Guest]: The fact that he comes from an OBC community helps in drawing a section of the community
[Guest]: towards the party and project a certain kind of image.
[Guest]: The second is very careful calculations of caste politics in each state.
[Unknown]: In UP, they figured that Muslims who constitute 20% of the population would not vote for them.
[Unknown]: Yadavs who constitute 10% of the population would vote for the Samajwadi party.
[Unknown]: 10 to 14% of the population are Jatas, Mayavatis, core vote, and that they would not vote for
[Unknown]: the BJP.
[Guest]: They felt that, you know, the mistake that BJP was making was that it was a 20% party
[Guest]: of Brahmins, Thakurs and Baniyas.
[Guest]: What it needed to become was a 55% party of Brahmins, Thakurs, Baniyas.
[Unknown]: So consolidate your upper caste base, but also get the others, get the other OBCs who
[Guest]: are resentful that the opportunities and political power and resources that came after Mandal
[Guest]: was monopolized by certain OBC subcastes like Yadavs and not shared among the larger heterogeneous
[Guest]: OBC parivaar.
[Guest]: When we talk about OBCs, one has to understand how diverse, how fragmented it is.
[Guest]: Among Dalits, they reached out to non-Jata Dalits who were resentful that Mayavati's
[Guest]: party, which began when Kanchiram started, he said jitni jiski sankhya utni uski hissedaariye.
[Guest]: So it was supposed to be a party which would give proportional representation to OBCs,
[Guest]: to Muslims, to Dalits.
[Guest]: It ended up becoming a Dalit party and eventually ended up becoming a Jatav party.
[Guest]: But there are 55 of the Dalit subcastes and BJP recognized that contradiction, mobilized
[Guest]: them.
[Guest]: So we see them reaching out to communities within the OBC and Dalit fold who are resentful
[Guest]: and have not got similar opportunities as some others within their community have.
[Guest]: The third thing we see is that this then leads to the construction of wide social coalitions
[Guest]: of the most visible castes, which are the upper castes, with the most invisible castes,
[Guest]: who are the most subaltern of these Hindu subcastes, against the dominant political
[Unknown]: caste of every state.
[Guest]: So in UP it was the Yadavs, in Haryana it's the Jats, in Maharashtra it's the Marathas
[Guest]: and BJP is constructing coalitions of everybody else against the dominant caste.
[Guest]: So that is again something that, and all of this was also reflecting in the organization.
[Guest]: So when Amit Shah went to UP in 14, he did a survey and he figured that the BJP organization
[Guest]: had only 7% OBCs as office bearers and 3% Dalits.
[Guest]: In a state where you have 50% OBCs and 20% Dalits, so 70% of the population in the party,
[Guest]: they are only 10%.
[Guest]: Today, 30% of the BJP organization in UP are OBCs and Dalits.
[Guest]: Out of 75 districts, 34 districts had OBC precedents, 3 had Dalits.
[Guest]: The state precedent was an OBC.
[Guest]: The numbers are still less than what their population share would suggest, but this clearly
[Guest]: shows you that BJP is changing on the ground, its organization is changing and it is becoming
[Guest]: more inclusive.
[Guest]: And so the stereotype that we often have, you know, all these things also break certain
[Guest]: stereotypes that we have cultivated about the BJP.
[Guest]: If we thought about the BJP as a rich man's party, as an urban party, Modi is now changing
[Unknown]: that.
[Unknown]: But if we have often thought of BJP as an upper caste party, but BJP may actually be
[Guest]: representing even the subaltern within the Hindu force.
[Amit Varma]: In fact, in your book you've quoted Badri Narayan, who's of course a renowned scholar
[Amit Varma]: on this subject, and I'll just read it out verbatim, quote, what Kanshi Ram did for Jatavs,
[Unknown]: the RSS and BJP are doing for the rest of the Dalits.
[Unknown]: They are helping create the community leaders, they are helping document their caste histories,
[Unknown]: they are exploring heroes of their community, they are inventing and celebrating their festivals,
[Unknown]: they are playing shakhas near Dalit bastis, unquote, and it almost seems like they're
[Amit Varma]: reinventing themselves as a Dalit party in doing all this, filling their party organization
[Amit Varma]: with, you know, OBCs and Dalits and so on, and doing that across states.
[Amit Varma]: What is the RSS's role in all this, where does the Sangh Parivar come in?
[Guest]: So as we know, the Sangh is the source of BJP's worldview, source of the BJP's personnel,
[Guest]: from the top, the Prime Minister, down to the booth worker, and then BJP has allegiance
[Guest]: to the Sangh, and this is an association they are very proud of, it is an organic relationship,
[Guest]: it's apparent.
[Guest]: But we have also seen in the past that when BJP has been in power, there have been tensions
[Guest]: between the Sangh and the BJP.
[Unknown]: During Anil Bihari Vajpayee's time, the Sangh affiliates were very critical of economic
[Unknown]: policies.
[Guest]: He shared a very difficult relationship with the Sarsang Chalat, and many BJP insiders
[Guest]: actually say that the 2004 elections went the way they did in key states because the
[Guest]: Sangh, or part of the Sangh machinery went inert.
[Unknown]: I think what is happening at the moment is that there is a very high degree of convergence
[Guest]: between the Sangh and the BJP, and this convergence is driven by three or four factors.
[Guest]: The first is the relationship between Narendra Modi and Mohan Bhagwat, who are contemporaries,
[Guest]: who have grown together in the Sangh, whose rise at the state level, or within the RSS
[Guest]: machine, or at the national level has almost coincided.
[Guest]: So this is a relationship where one can pick the phone, talk to the other, and say, you
[Guest]: know, calm down on this, I can't do this, or you have to do this.
[Unknown]: The second is ideological convergence.
[Guest]: I had spoken to a BHP leader, Ashok Singhal, in 2013, and I asked him, what would be your
[Guest]: expectations of Modi wins, and he said three things, Gai, Ganga, and Ayodhya, and if you
[Guest]: look at what's going on, Gai is clearly high up this government's agenda, Ganga may not
[Guest]: be clean, but they've spent a lot of political energy in creating a ministry which also has
[Amit Varma]: Ganga regime.
[Amit Varma]: They've built the Ganga narrative.
[Guest]: Ayodhya, nothing has happened from the central executive, but look at the political symbolism
[Guest]: of Yogi Adityanath celebrating Diwali at Ayodhya, and keep an eye out for what's going to happen
[Guest]: in the Supreme Court over the next year, where Ramchand Bhoomi case is up for hearing.
[Guest]: Incidentally, from December 5th, on the eve of the 25th anniversary, the hearing starts.
[Guest]: The third is that there is close coordination and personnel and policy.
[Guest]: So the RSS is not running the government of India, but every ministry of the government
[Guest]: of India is open to RSS inputs.
[Guest]: And the fourth is the prime minister, as we earlier discussed, is a proud cultural Hindu.
[Guest]: When he comes out of Kedarnath, when he comes out of Pashupatinath, when he comes out of
[Guest]: Vishwanath Mandir with the tika, he's basically telling the RSS base and the Hindu base that
[Amit Varma]: look, I am willing to own my religion.
[Amit Varma]: This reminds me of what the late Andrew Breitbart, the alt-right hero, once said, politics is
[Amit Varma]: downstream of culture.
[Amit Varma]: And it seems to me that this is how they've played their roles.
[Amit Varma]: The RSS has really entered the culture and taken it over, and it's been a project that's
[Unknown]: been going on for so long, and the BJP is doing the political side of it and actually
[Guest]: winning elections.
[Guest]: Would you say that makes sense?
[Guest]: Well, definitely.
[Guest]: I mean, see, we look at the post-2014 or post-2013 BJP, and we look at this as a very rapid rise
[Guest]: of BJP to power, right?
[Guest]: Who had thought that a person, a member of the BJP would occupy the Rashtrapati Bhavan,
[Guest]: would occupy the Maulana Azad Road residence of the Vice President of India in Delhi, would
[Guest]: occupy the Speaker of the Lok Sabha position, would be the Prime Minister of the country
[Guest]: and have the central government, would run governments in 18 states of India.
[Guest]: And we think that, oh, this happened so suddenly.
[Guest]: But the other way to look at it is that it has happened after 92 years of work that RSS
[Guest]: has put in.
[Guest]: And this is, you know, the RSS and the Communist Party of India was set up in the same year,
[Guest]: in 1925.
[Guest]: And we know where the RSS today is, and we know who the communists are, right?
[Guest]: But it gives you a very interesting frame to look at the sustained, disciplined work
[Guest]: of the Sangh over decades, without political power coming in.
[Guest]: I mean, Jhansang, as Amit Shah also keeps saying all the time, in public, we've spent
[Guest]: all our time in opposition, you know, this is actually work that has been done on the
[Guest]: cultural front, and now I think what is happening is that this Sangh ecosystem is changing the
[Guest]: Indian state, the Indian society and the Indian mind.
[Unknown]: And this is not work that has happened just over two years.
[Amit Varma]: So before we move on, just a tangential question that earlier we were talking about how all
[Amit Varma]: Amit Shah cares about is vulnerability.
[Amit Varma]: And therefore, it doesn't matter what you stand for, you just figure out how to win.
[Amit Varma]: But at the same time, the Sangh has this decades long project that's been going on, whatever
[Amit Varma]: you call it, the Hindutva project or the RSS project or whatever, how do you reconcile
[Guest]: these two?
[Guest]: So I think when I suggest that Amit Shah cares about vulnerability, and he's willing to co-opt
[Guest]: existing political elites of other parties, I think it is confined to elections.
[Guest]: The point is that after winning, what is it that the BJP is doing and on that, I don't
[Guest]: think the BJP has stepped back from its ideological framework.
[Guest]: So they are using power to A, maximize power and further expand power and that's something
[Guest]: that you see both Narendra Modi and Amit Shah having done in Gujarat.
[Guest]: Amit Shah has never sat on the opposition benches of the Gujarat Legislative Assembly.
[Guest]: He's always been in power.
[Guest]: Modi has not lost a single election that he has led back from 2001.
[Guest]: So they use power and they don't let the rules of normal rules of anti-incumbency set in
[Guest]: and they expand power.
[Guest]: But two, they have also used power to precisely change state institutions, to create alternative
[Guest]: intellectual ecosystems, and then we can debate the merits of it and to push a certain kind
[Guest]: of India that they want and they are reshaping what being an Indian means in some way.
[Guest]: So I think that ideological framework remains intact.
[Amit Varma]: This brings me to the next point in your book.
[Amit Varma]: At one point, you talk about how a newly elected BJP MLA from UP explained his success by saying
[Amit Varma]: it was an India-Pakistan election.
[Amit Varma]: And polarization was certainly a key tactic that the party used.
[Amit Varma]: So why and how did it work?
[Guest]: The BJP makes the Hindu voter angry.
[Guest]: The BJP makes the Hindu voter bitter.
[Guest]: The BJP makes the Hindu voter resentful.
[Guest]: The BJP makes the Hindu voter suspicious of the Muslim and suspicious of all other parties
[Guest]: who are projected as being sensitive only to Muslim interests at the cost of Hindu interests.
[Unknown]: The BJP does this through propaganda, it does this through lies, it does this through stoking
[Guest]: hatred, it does this through constructing narratives which are based on all of this.
[Guest]: If you look at UP again, it very systematically pushed the narrative of Love Jihad, which
[Guest]: for the uninitiated means an organized Muslim conspiracy to change the demographic balance.
[Guest]: When I reported from Buzafarnagar riots in 2013 and I heard the word Love Jihad, it came
[Guest]: to me as quite a surprise and it was a fringe Bajrang Dal mid-level functionary in Meerut
[Guest]: who first mentioned it.
[Guest]: When I started going back to West UP, I could see traders talk about Love Jihad, I could
[Guest]: see even journalists of mainstream Delhi papers use the word like that existed.
[Guest]: I could see politicians use it and it was acceptable for mainstream politicians to use
[Guest]: it.
[Guest]: Love Jihad is a lie.
[Guest]: Love Jihad is not based on facts, but Love Jihad is something that is a strongly entrenched
[Guest]: narrative now.
[Guest]: When BJP talks about how Muslim gangsters threw out Hindus from a town called Kairana
[Guest]: in West UP, all independent fact-finding committees have shown that this is not true.
[Guest]: But what does it do?
[Guest]: It constructs the Muslim as the criminal, it constructs the Muslim as hounding the Hindu.
[Guest]: When BJP talks about slaughterhouses, what is it doing?
[Guest]: It is constructing the Muslim as the butcher, you know, doing cow slaughter at every street
[Guest]: corner.
[Guest]: When BJP or even a person like the Prime Minister is talking about electricity being supplied
[Guest]: during Eid and not during Diwali and it is not based on facts, it is not true.
[Guest]: But what does it do?
[Guest]: It creates a certain sense of bitterness among the Hindu voter against both the Muslim as
[Guest]: well as the government which is seen as being sensitive to Muslims.
[Guest]: So the BJP constructs the majority vote, the Hindu vote across class lines, across class
[Guest]: lines through this narrative of deception, which is based on lies, right?
[Guest]: Why does it succeed?
[Guest]: It succeeds because secularism is dead.
[Guest]: There is absolutely no resonance of the idea and the term secularism in the Indo-Gangetic
[Guest]: planes.
[Guest]: And I did not meet a single Hindu voter, a Hindu voter of the Samajwadi Party, of the
[Guest]: BSP, of the Congress, so-called secular parties, using the word secular or telling me that
[Guest]: the secular communal binary was an important determinant in the way they made their political
[Guest]: choice.
[Guest]: Even in Bihar, which media commentators, all of us hailed as the victory of secular forces
[Guest]: against BJP, the JDU-RJD combine of Nitish Kumar and Lalu Prasad actually downplayed
[Guest]: secularism.
[Guest]: I know of anecdotes where Lalu Prasad Yadav told Muslim leaders, go back to your homes,
[Guest]: come out during election day, don't show your face, where Muslim leaders came and told Nitish
[Guest]: Kumar, don't put us on the stage, don't talk about us, focus on the Hindu vote.
[Guest]: In Muslim-dominated areas, the grand alliance of Nitish Kumar and Lalu Prasad Yadav gave
[Guest]: ticket to Hindu candidates so that the BJP would not be able to polarise.
[Guest]: So the idea of secularism, either because it's identified with parties which have misadministered
[Guest]: this country and are identified with corruption, or because secularism is seen only as pandering
[Guest]: quote-unquote to Muslim interests, or because of the sustained communal propaganda of the
[Unknown]: Sun, has no resonance.
[Guest]: And this is why I think when that MLA suggested to me that this was an India-Pakistan election,
[Guest]: he was basically telling me it was a Hindu-Muslim election, and because we know that this has
[Guest]: been an old narrative of the BJP of linking nationalism and religion, when Amit Shah said
[Guest]: in Bihar that if we lose, Pakistan will celebrate.
[Guest]: He was basically saying if we lose, who will celebrate?
[Guest]: The Muslim in your area will celebrate, and that Muslim in the area is basically an agent
[Guest]: of Pakistan.
[Guest]: When he said in UP that we have to defeat Qasab, and Qasab stands for Congress, Samajwadi
[Guest]: Party and Basfa, what is he saying?
[Guest]: He is saying that if we win, the Pakistani terrorist who conducted such an attack on
[Guest]: Indian sovereignty and interests and people would be defeated, and who is he represented
[Guest]: by here?
[Guest]: He's represented by these three so-called secular parties.
[Guest]: Why?
[Guest]: Because they listen and represent Muslim interests.
[Guest]: So this conflation that is done of nationalism and religion, and the subtle projection of
[Guest]: the Muslims in the fifth column, is something that is really working, it's resonating, whether
[Guest]: we like it or not.
[Guest]: When he said that it's an India-Pakistan election, he basically meant it's a Hindu-Muslim election
[Guest]: and Hindus won.
[Amit Varma]: And this is out of the classic playbook of populists and nationalists, where you create
[Amit Varma]: another and then you project yourself as standing for your people and you, you know, like the
[Amit Varma]: dead magnificent icon in Qasab, which is like so incredibly clever when you think about
[Amit Varma]: it, venal but clever, you associate your enemies with the other, and therefore it becomes a
[Amit Varma]: very simple choice.
[Amit Varma]: And I'm just thinking a lot, it seems to me that the reason that this works is because
[Amit Varma]: anger is a much more effective way of motivating a voter to actually take action than a benign
[Amit Varma]: goodwill towards everyone.
[Amit Varma]: And so it works.
[Amit Varma]: So just sort of summing up some of the major factors that you pointed out, at level one,
[Amit Varma]: there was the narrative around Modi himself, his transformation from a Hindu Hriday Samrat
[Unknown]: to a Vikas Purush to a Gareebu Ka Neta, essentially being all things to all people and without
[Unknown]: contradicting himself at any point.
[Unknown]: Level two was an incredible ground game, which you've laid out in detail in your book and
[Unknown]: I'd urge listeners to buy it and read that and it should really be a Harvard Business
[Unknown]: School case study.
[Unknown]: I mean, I can't think of any election anywhere in the world, given the scale of this, that
[Amit Varma]: such remarkable work has been done.
[Unknown]: Three is how they navigated UP and other states like Haryana and Maharashtra by looking past
[Unknown]: the caste dynamics, by triggering resentments among, you know, OBCs who felt left out and
[Unknown]: Dalits who felt left out because there were other, you know, because the Yadavs or the
[Amit Varma]: Jats or the Marathas were getting the OBC spoils and so on and so forth.
[Amit Varma]: And then almost reinventing themselves into a Dalit party and doing it with actual hard
[Amit Varma]: work on the ground, rather than just mere campaign rhetoric, which is quite remarkable.
[Amit Varma]: After this, we see the cultural role of the Sangh Parivar getting, you know, ingraining
[Amit Varma]: those ideas among the people building up that social movement and then using it to feed
[Unknown]: into the political party.
[Amit Varma]: And fifth is the tactic of polarization, where you motivate people to come out and vote by
[Amit Varma]: creating fear and hatred against the Yadav.
[Amit Varma]: Now, my question to you, therefore, at the end of the podcast, as you know, you've studied
[Amit Varma]: the party very deeply, is that as you've pointed out in the book, a lot of these sort of coalitions
[Amit Varma]: are very tenuous.
[Amit Varma]: You know, whether it's Modi being all these different things, or whether it's the caste
[Amit Varma]: configurations in UP where you've got all the, you know, non-Yadav OBCs and the non-Jatav
[Amit Varma]: Dalits.
[Amit Varma]: And plus, you know, in fact, I think somewhere in the book or elsewhere in the analysis,
[Amit Varma]: you mentioned how the plan was for Maurya, if I'm not mistaken, because he's an OBC leader
[Amit Varma]: to be chief minister and instead it was Adityanath and wondering how that would play out.
[Amit Varma]: And how hard will it be now for the BJP, because 2014 and what has followed since was almost
[Amit Varma]: a perfect storm.
[Amit Varma]: How hard will it be for them to keep all these strings tied together and in place?
[Guest]: So you know, we do look at, I think you summed it up very well, those are the sources of
[Guest]: strength that I identify in the party.
[Guest]: The only point I would supplement with is that in areas outside this traditional stronghold,
[Unknown]: like the Northeast, the BJP adopts a different set of techniques, it co-opts existing political
[Guest]: elites, it dilutes its ideological core, it adapts to specific realities and it's been
[Unknown]: able to expand.
[Guest]: But to go back to your question, I still don't think that BJP is invincible.
[Guest]: In a competitive democracy, in a very complex, hierarchical, unequal society like India,
[Guest]: with strong regional variants, strong sub-nationalisms, diverse linguistic politics, I think it's
[Guest]: very difficult for a party to remain hegemonic, at the moment it is probably hegemonic.
[Guest]: And there are key vulnerabilities, right.
[Amit Varma]: So what are the vulnerabilities?
[Guest]: If you go back to the sources of strength, the first vulnerability is whether Modi would
[Guest]: be able to sustain this multi-class alliance.
[Guest]: To do that, he will need to keep corporate India happy, he will need to keep the salaried
[Guest]: middle classes happy, he will need to keep the new middle class of young Indians, as
[Guest]: he calls them, who are coming into urban spaces, who want jobs, who have aspirations happy,
[Guest]: and he needs to keep the poor happy.
[Guest]: And for that, you need high degrees of growth, you need job creation, or at least job losses
[Guest]: not happening.
[Guest]: And that's what we've seen in the last few months.
[Guest]: And you need welfare.
[Guest]: Right?
[Guest]: Those are three important legs of this multi-class alliance.
[Guest]: And as the economic narrative starts slipping from the government's control, as a sense
[Guest]: grows that they are not able to deliver on either of these fronts, I think this alliance
[Guest]: will become vulnerable.
[Guest]: I'm not suggesting that it's happened.
[Guest]: But it is something I think the government is also very aware of and is conscious of
[Guest]: BJP is.
[Guest]: The second is sustaining the multi-caste coalition, and you're right with the UP example.
[Guest]: Here was a party that constructed an inclusive Hindu coalition in the run up to the elections.
[Guest]: But after the elections, if a sense grows, as it has grown to some extent in UP that
[Guest]: it's actually all a cover for upper caste hegemony, and while they will use us in elections,
[Guest]: but after the elections, power will be monopolized by the upper caste, then you will see this
[Guest]: alliance break and a Bihar BJP leader actually told me that, look, we are no longer untouchables
[Guest]: for the backwards and Dalits, but we are not their natural party and this is work in progress.
[Guest]: So you look at Yogi Adityanath who is a Thakur, Dinesh Sharma, another deputy chief minister
[Guest]: was a Brahmin, the cabinet which is very high upper caste representation, or when I last
[Guest]: looked at the figures in the UP police, out of 75 districts, 42 were upper caste SPs.
[Guest]: So Brahmins and Thakurs and Sarkais also.
[Guest]: So if a sense grows that, look, power distribution is not equitable among different castes, multi-caste
[Guest]: alliance will get fragile.
[Guest]: The third is the tension that I think exists between belligerent majoritarian politics
[Guest]: and the ambition to expand and become a truly national party.
[Guest]: Amit Shah knows that repeating the performance of 2014 in northwest and central India is
[Guest]: difficult if not impossible, getting 26 on 26 seats in Gujarat, getting 25 on 25 seats
[Guest]: in Rajasthan, getting 7 on 7 seats in Delhi, getting 71 along with allies, 73 out of 80
[Guest]: seats in UP, getting 30 out of 40 seats in Bihar, getting 5 out of 5 seats in Uttarakhand,
[Guest]: getting 27 out of 29 seats in Madhya Pradesh, getting 10 out of 11 seats in Chhattisgarh,
[Guest]: yet again, for a second time running is difficult and therefore the need is to expand in south
[Guest]: and east India and they have expanded to some extent, they have worked hard and will be
[Guest]: formidable in Odisha next time, they will win more seats from the northeast, but their
[Guest]: expansion plans hit a roadblock because the kind of politics that they do in northwest
[Guest]: central India also, you can't continue to do Gauraksha politics in UP and expect all
[Guest]: of Kerala to support you or all of Meghalaya to support you.
[Guest]: So how will that trade-off happen within the BJP, I think the third variable and the final
[Guest]: variable I think is that as we know it's not just the case that one party wins the election,
[Guest]: somebody has to lose the election and Congress in this country has been consistently losing
[Guest]: the election.
[Guest]: So the state of the opposition will be a key determinant whether Rahul Gandhi can go through
[Guest]: a product reinvention like Modi has gone through multiple times, whether he stops being an
[Guest]: object of mockery.
[Guest]: You know, a politician can be ignored, hated, liked, but he can't be laughed at and the
[Guest]: problem for Rahul was that he was being laughed at consistently.
[Guest]: We have seen some stirrings of change in the last two months, I don't know whether it is
[Guest]: enough.
[Guest]: Congress is a mass-based party, so when one puts this story of BJP's organization to Congress
[Guest]: leaders, they tell us, look, we have never won with an organization, we have always won
[Guest]: when the public mood changes, we are a lazy party.
[Guest]: But I don't think being a lazy party, it'll be easy for Congress to confront the machinery
[Guest]: of this sort.
[Guest]: So what can they do with their organization?
[Guest]: And in states which are bipolar states, we are speaking at an interesting moment because
[Guest]: the next six elections, big elections in India, Gujarat, Himachal, Karnataka, MP, Chhattisgarh,
[Guest]: Rajasthan, till the end of 2018, are all straight Congress-BJP contests.
[Guest]: So in bipolar states, how does Congress manage to beat the BJP, and in states where Congress
[Guest]: is weak, does it stitch up a grand alliance of anti-BJP forces?
[Guest]: So the state of the opposition and what that will look like at the end of 2018, early 2019
[Guest]: will also be an important variable.
[Guest]: Every election is open, 2019 election is not a done deal.
[Guest]: And predicting an election or the future of Indian politics is a very dangerous enterprise.
[Guest]: I will not get into that territory.
[Guest]: There are vulnerabilities, but BJP is of course, and looks set to remain the dominant Indian
[Unknown]: political actor for a while.
[Amit Varma]: And whether one supports a BJP or is against it, we can all agree that a healthy democracy
[Unknown]: needs a healthy opposition.
[Unknown]: And for me, what the opposition needs to do is read your remarkable book, and I hope they'll
[Unknown]: do that.
[Unknown]: Thank you so much for coming on my show, Prashant.
[Guest]: You've been very kind, Amit.
[Guest]: Thank you so much.
[Amit Varma]: If you enjoyed listening to the show, hop over to your nearest bookstore and buy Prashant's
[Amit Varma]: excellent book, How the BJP Wins.
[Amit Varma]: You can also follow him on Twitter at Prashant KTM.
[Amit Varma]: You can follow me at Amit Verma, A-M-I-T-V-A-R-M-A.
[Amit Varma]: And you can browse past episodes of The Seen and The Unseen at seenunseen.in.
[Unknown]: Thank you for listening.
[Amit Varma]: If you enjoyed listening to The Seen and The Unseen, it makes complete sense for you to
[Amit Varma]: check out the Pragati Podcast, a show on public policy.
[Amit Varma]: Pragati is a magazine I edit, and the Pragati Podcast is hosted by two of my colleagues,
[Amit Varma]: Pawan Srinath and Hamsini Hariharan.
[Amit Varma]: Every week, Pawan and Hamsini analyse views and news from India and the world, and talk
[Amit Varma]: to experts and practitioners on a wide range of issues.
[Amit Varma]: Episodes out every Thursday.
[Amit Varma]: So there's your midweek fix right there.
[Unknown]: Good evening, ladies and gentlemen, this is your captain speaking.
[Unknown]: Sorry to say, but there's been a slight delay due to the apocalypse having suddenly begun.
[Unknown]: As you can see, there's death, destruction and chaos taking place all around us.
[Unknown]: But don't you worry, food and drinks will be served shortly.
[Unknown]: And I would recommend checking out IVM Podcasts to get some of your favorite Indian podcasts.
[Unknown]: We'll keep you going till this whole thing blows over.
[Unknown]: Thank you.